[MUSIC]
Welcome back to the course
on approximation algorithms.
In this chapter, we're going to study a
new problem, the multiway cut problem, and
develop a new interesting linear
program and relaxation and
use it to design an original
version of randomized rounding.
What is the multiway cut problem?
It's defined by its input and its output.
The input is a graph where the edges
of the graph has some weights,
and in this graph, there's some
special vertices called terminals.
We have k of them, where k is fixed.
Maybe two, maybe three,
maybe six as in the case of this picture.
Six special vertices called terminals.
The goal is to cut those
terminals from one another.
How?
But cutting edges.
So, the output is a subset of edges,
subset F, such that if you removed those
edges from the graph, all the terminals
are disconnected from one another, and
your goal is to minimize
the weight of the edges you cut.
So, that's the multiway cut problem.
There's a special case
which is quite familiar.
When k is equal to 2, k=2,
2 terminals, a and b.
Disconnect a from b using
edges of minimum weight.
That's a cut,
a cut disconnecting a from b, min cut.
That's the famous min cut problem, which,
as we know, is polynomial time,
can be solved in polynomial time.
Next case, k = 3.
Three terminals, a,
b, c, that must be disconnected from one
another by a minimum weight set of edges.
That problem is already NP-hard,
already for k = 3.
This is not really surprising because
it's one of many cases of problems
in minimal optimization where
the case k = 2 is simple, and
k = 3 or more is hard and
NP-hard to solve exactly.
So here's a simple algorithm for k = 3.
We take our three terminals, a, b, c.
Let's compute the minimum way to
cut vertex a from vertices b and c.
The minimum way to disconnect a from b and
c.
Here it is.
If you cut the graph this way,
this is a minimum way,
minimum weight set of edges
that disconnects the graph.
It's a partition of
the vertices into two subsets,
such that the edges across to
cut have the minimum weight, and
it disconnects vertex
a from vertices b and c.
Second, we solve the same problem,
isolating vertex b.
Find the minimum cut separating
vertex b from vertices a and c.
A partition on the graph into
vertices on the b side and
the vertices on the a or c side.
Third, similarly,
you compute the minimum cut separating
vertex C from the other two vertices.
The other two terminals.
And now what do you do?
You take this three cuts,
you choose the two cheapest ones and
you output their union.
Here it is.
In this case,
it turns out that the red and
the purple cuts are the cheapest of
the three, and so, this is your solution.
Okay, so that is the algorithm.
Very simple.
Now, is this algorithm
a working algorithm?
Can it be solved in polynomial time?
Let's see.
We need to find as a sub routine a way
to separate vertex a from vertices b and
c in polynomial time.
This can be done easily by
a reduction to the mincut problem.
Here is how.
You create a new vertex called s.
And other new vertex called t.
You connect s to a with
an edge of infinite weight.
You connect vertices b and c to t,
with edges of infinite weight.
In this new graph, you solve the mincut
problem, mincut separating s from t.
This minimum cut will never
use the infinite with edges
because that could be too costly.
So it will use only edges from
the inside of the graph, and so
it will give you a solution that
has a on the same side as s.
b and c on the same side as t,
therefore it will separate a from bc.
In fact, the cuts are in exact
one to one correspondence.
The cuts from s to t and from a to bc.
So, we can solve this in polynomial time.
Is the output correct?
Is it a three way cut?
Does it separate the three
terminals from one another?
Well, let's see.
Here we take the red and
the purple solutions.
The red cut separates
vertex a from both b and c.
So now, there's no connection from
a to b and no connection from b to c.
There could still be connections between
b and c, but thanks to the purple cut
that separates c from the other two
vertices, c is disconnected from b.
And so the solution is a three-way cut.
It is a correct solution to the problem.
Finally, how good is it?
What is the cost of the output?
We said over three cuts
separating a from bc, b from ac,
and c from ab, the output cost is
the two cheapest of these three terms.
So its cost is at most,
two-thirds of the sum.
The cost of the output
of this simple algorithm
is at most two-thirds times
the sum of the mincuts.
So, we have upperbounded the cost
of the output of the algorithm.
To continue with the analysis as usual,
what we need to do is
lowerbound the cost of OPT.
Consider OPT.
OPT is greater than or
equal to the mincut from a to bc.
Why?
Because the absolution separates all
three terminals from one another.
So it does separate terminal
a from the other two terminals.
So it is a feasible cut from a to bc, and
therefore, the value of OPT is at
least the mincut from a to bc.
Similarly, it's at least
the mincut from b to ac.
And at least the mincut from c to ab.
So, if it's at least each of these three
terms, then it's at least their average.
At least one-third of
the sum of the mincuts.
The output is at most two thirds
of the sum of the mincuts.
OPT is at least one third
of the sum on the mincuts,
therefore the algorithm
is a two approximation.
We have proof that our solution
Can you do better?
You can do better if you do your
analysis a little bit more carefully.
Let's see.
Let's go directly to an extension for
k general.
We have k terminals, a1, a2, ak.
The natural extension of
the algorithm is to output
the k-1 smallest of all
k mincuts where the ith
one separates terminal i for
all the other terminals.
Again, here again,
this can be done in polynomial time,
because to compute the mincut separating
terminal ai from the other terminals,
we connect, or
solve s with an infinite edge to ai.
Sync t with infinite edges
to all the other terminals.
And then we solve mincut from s to t.
So this is a polylimal time algorithm
that gives you k way cut, a meltaway cut.
And what we need to do
is analyze it's value.
Let's see.
Similarly, we output the k-
1 smallest of k cuts.
The cost of this output
can be upper bounded
by what it would be on average if we had
a random choice of k- 1 cuts among k.
And so, the cost of the output
is at most k minus 1 over k,
times the sum of the mincuts.
The sum of over every i of
the value of the mincut
separating terminal ai from
all of the other terminals.
That's the upper bound on
the cost of the output.
Now let's do a lower
bound on the cost of OPT.
Let's analyze OPT.
The optimal solution, I claim,
defines some cuts separating for
each I, terminal AI,
from all the other terminals.
Indeed consider an edge e,
which is part of the OPT solution.
Why is e part of OPT?
Because if we left e in the graph,
then two terminals would be connected.
There would be two terminals
that would be connected.
That's why OPT has to remove edge e.
So it must be that,
edge e, once we remove it,
it separates some terminal
ai from some terminal aj.
Next, put this at e at
a set of edges F(I) and
in a set of edges F(J).
Each edge of OPT this way,
we put it into two sets, F(I).
In F(j).
If this edge connects,
if edge e connects a vertex which is
in the cluster of ai, with a vertex
that is in the cluster of terminal j.
That is the definition of F(i) and F(j).
In other words,
define F(i) as the set of edges of OPT
that separate terminal ai from some
terminal aj for j different from i.
Every edge e in OPT belongs to two sets,
F(i) and F(j).
So, if we sum the cost of all these
F(i)'s, every edge appears twice.
So, we get exactly 2 times OPT.
So this gives us a way to
express the value of OPT,
2 times OPT is equal to the sum
over i of the cost of F(i).
Moving on.
How do we analyze the cost of F(i)?
F(i).
F(i) consists of all the edges of OPT
that separate terminal ai
from some other terminal.
So F(i) separates ai from
the rest of the terminals.
And so the cost of F(i) is at least the
minimum cost to separate ai from the rest.
So the cost of (Fi) is greater than or
equal to the Mincut.
Mincut of ai from the other terminals.
Let's do this, take this and sum now.
When we sum, we get 2 times OPT,
which is the sum
of the cost of fi is at least
the sum over i of all the min cuts.
2 times OPT is at least
the sum over i of the mincut separating
terminal ai from the other terminals.
Now all we have to do is combine
this with our upper bound
on the cost of the output
of the algorithm.
The cost of the output is at most k
minus 1 over k times the sum of mincuts.
That, we proved.
Now this sum of the mincuts
is at most 2 times OPT.
So what does this give you?
It shows that the algorithm is a 2
times 1 minus 1 over k approximation.
The algorithm is an approximation with
an approximation ratio of 2 times
1 minus 1 over k.
K = 2.
What does this give us?
2 times 1 minus one-half.
That's 1.
1 times OPT.
The algorithm is optimal.
Indeed, it's just computing a mincut.
K = 3.
1 minus 1 over k,
that's 1 minus one-third.
That's two-thirds.
2 times two-thirds,
this is a four thirds approximation.
So actually, the knowledge
assessed earlier was not right.
Actually, by doing this
more careful analysis,
we were able to prove that the algorithm
is a four thirds approximation for k = 3.
And a 2 times 1 minus 1 over k
approximation for k general.
Now what we're going to do
is we're gonna try to design
a better algorithm relying on
an interesting LP relaxation.